%
This day is called the feast of Crispian.
He that outlives this day and comes safe home
Will stand o’ tiptoe when this day is named
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall see this day, and live old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors
And say “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.”
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,
But he’ll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,
Familiar in his mouth as household words,
Harry the King, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.
This story shall the good man teach his son,
And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be rememberèd—
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he today that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition;
And gentlemen in England now abed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.
    [ Henry V, IV.iii.43-69 ]
%
Marry, if you would put me to verses or
to dance for your sake, Kate, why you undid me.
For the one, I have neither words nor measure; and
for the other, I have no strength in measure, yet a
reasonable measure in strength. If I could win a
lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with
my armor on my back, under the correction of
bragging be it spoken, I should quickly leap into a
wife. Or if I might buffet for my love, or bound my
horse for her favors, I could lay on like a butcher
and sit like a jackanapes, never off. But, before God,
Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence,
nor I have no cunning in protestation, only
downright oaths, which I never use till urged, nor
never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of
this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth sun-burning,
that never looks in his glass for love of
anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook.
    [ Henry V, V.ii.138-155 ]
%
All things are ready if our minds be so.
    [ Henry V, IV.iii.73 ]
%
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once
  more,
Or close the wall up with our English dead!
In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man
As modest stillness and humility,
But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger:
Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage,
Then lend the eye a terrible aspect,
Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass cannon, let the brow o’erwhelm it
As fearfully as doth a gallèd rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base
Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.
Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide,
Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
To his full height.
    [ Henry V, III.i.1-18 ]
%
What a long night is this! I will not change
my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.
Çà, ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his
entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the Pegasus, qui
a les narines de feu. When I bestride him, I soar; I
am a hawk; he trots the air. The earth sings when he
touches it. The basest horn of his hoof is more
musical than the pipe of Hermes.
    [ Henry V, III.vii.11-18 ]
%
Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
As self-neglecting.
    [ Henry V, II.iv.80-81 ]
%
As young as I am, I have observed these three
swashers. I am boy to them all three, but all they
three, though they would serve me, could not be
man to me. For indeed three such antics do not
amount to a man: for Bardolph, he is white-livered
and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out
but fights not; for Pistol, he hath a killing tongue
and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks
words and keeps whole weapons; for Nym, he hath
heard that men of few words are the best men, and
therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should
be thought a coward, but his few bad words are
matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke
any man’s head but his own, and that was against a
post when he was drunk. They will steal anything
and call it purchase.
    [ Henry V, III.ii.29-44 ]
%
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great
kings. Dear Kate, you and I cannot be confined
within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are
the makers of manners, Kate, and the liberty that
follows our places stops the mouth of all find-faults,
as I will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of
your country in denying me a kiss. Therefore,
patiently and yielding. (he kisses her) You have
witchcraft in your lips, Kate. There is more eloquence
in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues
of the French council, and they should sooner
persuade Harry of England than a general petition
of monarchs.
    [ Henry V, V.ii.279-291 ]
%
O, for a muse of fire that would ascend
The brightest heaven of invention!
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act,
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!
    [ Henry V, PRO.I.1-4 ]
%
        Let us swear
That you are worth your breeding, which I doubt
  not,
For there is none of you so mean and base
That hath not noble luster in your eyes.
I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot.
    [ Henry V, III.ii.29-35 ]
%
        God almighty,
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out.
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry.
Besides, they are our outward consciences
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed
And make a moral of the devil himself.
    [ Henry V, IV.i.3-12 ]
%
He is as full of valor as of kindness,
Princely in both.
    [ Henry V, IV.iii.16-17 ]
%
KING HENRY
What treasure, uncle?
EXETER          Tennis balls,
my liege.
KING HENRY
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.
His present and your pains we thank you for.
When we have matched our rackets to these balls,
We will in France, by God’s grace, play a set
Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard.
Tell him he hath made a match with such a
  wrangler
That all the courts of France will be disturbed
With chases.
    [ Henry V, I.ii.267-278 ]
%
        And tell the Dauphin
His jest will savor but of shallow wit
When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.
    [ Henry V, I.ii.307-309 ]
%
But if it be a sin to covet honor,
I am the most offending soul alive.
    [ Henry V, IV.iii.31-32 ]
%
    ...when lenity and cruelty play
for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest
winner.
    [ Henry V, III.vi.114-116 ]
%
        Every subject’s duty is
the King’s, but every subject’s soul is his own.
Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as
every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of
his conscience. And, dying so, death is to him
advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost
wherein such preparation was gained.
    [ Henry V, IV.i.182-188 ]
%
BATES Ay, or more than we should seek after, for we
know enough if we know we are the King’s subjects.
If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the
King wipes the crime of it out of us.
WILLIAMS But if the cause be not good, the King
himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all
those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a
battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry
all “We died at such a place,” some swearing, some
crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left
poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe,
some upon their children rawly left. I am afeard
there are few die well that die in a battle, for how
can they charitably dispose of anything when blood
is their argument? Now, if these men do not die
well, it will be a black matter for the king that led
them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion
of subjection.
    [ Henry V, IV.i.134-151 ]
%
Your Majesty shall mock at me. I cannot
speak your England.
    [ Henry V, V.ii.105-106 ]
%
O God of battles, steel my soldiers’ hearts.
Possess them not with fear. Take from them now
The sense of reck’ning editorial emendationoreditorial emendation th’ opposèd numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not today, O Lord,
O, not today, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown.
I Richard’s body have interrèd new
And on it have bestowed more contrite tears
Than from it issued forcèd drops of blood.
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay
Who twice a day their withered hands hold up
Toward heaven to pardon blood. And I have built
Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will I do—
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.
    [ Henry V, IV.i.300-316 ]
%
Cheerly to sea. The signs of war advance.
No king of England if not king of France.
    [ Henry V, II.iii.201-202 ]
%
KING HENRY
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
WESTMORELAND
God’s will, my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
KING HENRY
Why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men,
Which likes me better than to wish us one.—
You know your places. God be with you all.
    [ Henry V, IV.iii.75-80 ]
%
CONSTABLE If the English had any apprehension, they
would run away.
ORLÉANS That they lack; for if their heads had any
intellectual armor, they could never wear such
heavy headpieces.
    [ Henry V, III.vii.137-141 ]
%
RAMBURES That island of England breeds very valiant
creatures. Their mastiffs are of unmatchable
courage.
ORLÉANS Foolish curs, that run winking into the
mouth of a Russian bear and have their heads
crushed like rotten apples. You may as well say
that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the
lip of a lion.
    [ Henry V, III.vii.142-149 ]
%
The devil take order now! I’ll to the throng.
Let life be short, else shame will be too long.
    [ Henry V, IV.vi.24-25 ]
%
        ...And
there is throats to be cut, and works to be done!
    [ Henry V, III.ii.113-114 ]
%
In cases of defense, ’tis best to weigh
The enemy more mighty than he seems.
    [ Henry V, II.iv.45-46 ]
%
