%
    What talkest thou to me of the hangman? If
I hang, I’ll make a fat pair of gallows, for if I hang,
old Sir John hangs with me, and thou knowest he is
no starveling. Tut, there are other Troyans that
thou dream’st not of, the which for sport sake are
content to do the profession some grace, that
would, if matters should be looked into, for their
own credit sake make all whole. I am joined with no
foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers,
none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms,
but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters
and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such
as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner
than drink, and drink sooner than pray, and yet,
zounds, I lie, for they pray continually to their saint
the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her but
prey on her, for they ride up and down on her and
make her their boots.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.i.71-88 ]
%
I know you all, and will awhile uphold
The unyoked humor of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
To smother up his beauty from the world,
That, when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at
By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
Of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playing holidays,
To sport would be as tedious as to work,
But when they seldom come, they wished-for come,
And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
So when this loose behavior I throw off
And pay the debt I never promisèd,
By how much better than my word I am,
By so much shall I falsify men’s hopes;
And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My reformation, glitt’ring o’er my fault,
Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I’ll so offend to make offense a skill,
Redeeming time when men think least I will.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, I.ii.202-224 ]
%
HOTSPUR
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
PRINCE
Thou speak’st as if I would deny my name.
HOTSPUR
My name is Harry Percy.
PRINCE      Why then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more.
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double reign
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.iv.59-68 ]
%
GLENDOWER
I can call spirits from the vasty deep.
HOTSPUR
Why, so can I, or so can any man,
But will they come when you do call for them?
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, III.i.55-57 ]
%
FALSTAFF    Hal, if thou see me down in the battle and
bestride me, so; ’tis a point of friendship.
PRINCE      Nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship.
Say thy prayers, and farewell.
FALSTAFF I would ’twere bedtime, Hal, and all well.
PRINCE Why, thou owest God a death.     (he exits)
FALSTAFF    ’Tis not due yet. I would be loath to pay Him
before His day. What need I be so forward with
Him that calls not on me? Well, ’tis no matter.
Honor pricks me on. Yea, but how if honor prick me
off when I come on? How then? Can honor set to a
leg? No. Or an arm? No. Or take away the grief of a
wound? No. Honor hath no skill in surgery, then?
No. What is honor? A word. What is in that word
“honor”? What is that “honor”? Air. A trim reckoning.
Who hath it? He that died o’ Wednesday. Doth
he feel it? No. Doth he hear it? No. ’Tis insensible,
then? Yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the
living? No. Why? Detraction will not suffer it. Therefore,
I’ll none of it. Honor is a mere scutcheon. And
so ends my catechism.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.ii.122-142 ]
%
And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth. Tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I’ll be sworn I have power to shame him
  hence.
O, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, III.i.60-65 ]
%
HOTSPUR
O Harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth.
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me.
They wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my
  flesh.
But thoughts, the slaves of life, and life, time’s fool,
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue. No, Percy, thou art dust,
And food for—       (he dies)
PRINCE
For worms, brave Percy.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.iv.78-89 ]
%
        No, my good lord,
banish Peto, banish Bardolph, banish Poins, but for
sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack
Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more
valiant being as he is old Jack Falstaff, banish not
him thy Harry’s company, banish not him thy
Harry’s company. Banish plump Jack, and banish
all the world.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.491-498 ]
%
Got with much ease. Now merrily to horse.
The thieves are all scattered, and possessed with
  fear
So strongly that they dare not meet each other.
Each takes his fellow for an officer.
Away, good Ned. Falstaff sweats to death,
And lards the lean earth as he walks along.
Were’t not for laughing, I should pity him.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iii.109-116 ]
%
By God, thou hast deceived me, Lancaster.
I did not think thee lord of such a spirit.
Before, I loved thee as a brother, John,
But now I do respect thee as my soul.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.iv.17-20 ]
%
By the Lord, I knew you as well as he that
made you. Why, hear you, my masters, was it for
me to kill the heir apparent? Should I turn upon the
true prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as
Hercules, but beware instinct. The lion will not
touch the true prince. Instinct is a great matter.
I was now a coward on instinct. I shall think
the better of myself, and thee, during my life—
I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.
But, by the Lord, lads, I am glad you have the
money.—Hostess, clap to the doors.—Watch tonight,
pray tomorrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts
of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to
you. What, shall we be merry? Shall we have a play
extempore?
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.278-292 ]
%
O gentlemen, the time of life is short;
To spend that shortness basely were too long
If life did ride upon a dial’s point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour.
An if we live, we live to tread on kings;
If die, brave death, when princes die with us.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.ii.85-90 ]
%
    I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a
lie, spit in my face, call me horse.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.202-203 ]
%
That ever this fellow should have fewer words
than a parrot, and yet the son of a woman! His
industry is upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence
the parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percy’s
mind, the Hotspur of the north, he that kills me
some six or seven dozen of Scots at a breakfast,
washes his hands, and says to his wife “Fie upon
this quiet life! I want work.” “O my sweet Harry,”
says she, “how many hast thou killed today?”
“Give my roan horse a drench,” says he, and answers
“Some fourteen,” an hour after. “A trifle, a
trifle.” I prithee, call in Falstaff. I’ll play Percy,
and that damned brawn shall play Dame Mortimer
his wife. “Rivo!” says the drunkard. Call in
Ribs, call in Tallow.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.101-115 ]
%
FALSTAFF Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?
PRINCE Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old
sack, and unbuttoning thee after supper, and
sleeping upon benches after noon, that thou hast
forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst
truly know. What a devil hast thou to do with
the time of the day? Unless hours were cups of
sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues
of bawds, and dials the signs of leaping-houses,
and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in
flame-colored taffeta, I see no reason why thou
shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time
of the day.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, I.ii.1-13 ]
%
How now, my sweet creature of bombast? How long
is ’t ago, Jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.339-340 ]
%
        They
take it already upon their salvation that though I be
but Prince of Wales, yet I am the king of courtesy,
and tell me flatly I am no proud jack, like Falstaff,
but a Corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy—by
the Lord, so they call me—and when I am king of
England, I shall command all the good lads in
Eastcheap.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.8-15 ]
%
    There is not such a word
Spoke of in Scotland as this term of fear.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, IV.ii.88-89 ]
%
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound,
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, V.iv.90-94 ]
%
FALSTAFF Began to give me ground, but I followed me
close, came in foot and hand, and, with a thought,
seven of the eleven I paid.
PRINCE O monstrous! Eleven buckram men grown out
of two!
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.225-229 ]
%
I’ll be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine
coward, this bed-presser, this horse-backbreaker,
this huge hill of flesh—
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, II.iv.251-253 ]
%
The edge of war, like an ill-sheathèd knife,
No more shall cut his master.
    [ Henry IV, Part 1, I.i.17-18 ]
%
